What Is Data Science?
There’s a joke that says a data scientist is someone who knows more statistics than a
computer scientist and more computer science than a statistician. (I didn’t say it was a
good joke.) In fact, some data scientists are — for all practical purposes — statisticians,
while others are pretty much indistinguishable from software engineers. Some are
machine-learning experts, while others couldn’t machine-learn their way out of
kindergarten. Some are PhDs with impressive publication records, while others have never
read an academic paper (shame on them, though). In short, pretty much no matter how you
define data science, you’ll find practitioners for whom the definition is totally, absolutely
wrong.
Nonetheless, we won’t let that stop us from trying. We’ll say that a data scientist is
someone who extracts insights from messy data. Today’s world is full of people trying to
turn data into insight.
For instance, the dating site OkCupid asks its members to answer thousands of questions
in order to find the most appropriate matches for them. But it also analyzes these results to
figure out innocuous-sounding questions you can ask someone to find out how likely
someone is to sleep with you on the first date.
Facebook asks you to list your hometown and your current location, ostensibly to make it
easier for your friends to find and connect with you. But it also analyzes these locations to
identify global migration patterns and where the fanbases of different football teams live.
As a large retailer, Target tracks your purchases and interactions, both online and in-store.
And it uses the data to predictively model which of its customers are pregnant, to better
market baby-related purchases to them.
In 2012, the Obama campaign employed dozens of data scientists who data-mined and
experimented their way to identifying voters who needed extra attention, choosing optimal
donor-specific fundraising appeals and programs, and focusing get-out-the-vote efforts
where they were most likely to be useful. It is generally agreed that these efforts played an
important role in the president’s re-election, which means it is a safe bet that political
campaigns of the future will become more and more data-driven, resulting in a neverending
arms race of data science and data collection.
Now, before you start feeling too jaded: some data scientists also occasionally use their
skills for good — using data to make government more effective, to help the homeless,
and to improve public health. But it certainly won’t hurt your career if you like figuring
out the best way to get people to click on advertisements.